Hi Markus,

I've attached the last PDF you sent me with my notes.

> attached is the next state of the paper. The kind of feedback
> I'd appreciate most at this time is whether the paper as a whole
> has enough merit to be submitted. The story should be clear,
> the main ingredients are in. In places, things are still missing, and
> of course the language etc. can be improved a lot.

The main issue that the paper has that it is not clear what its message is

* What is the contribution?
* What is new?
* Is there existing related work that this paper follows up on? This
reads as if all of the paper is completely new.
* How about the relation with regular module systems? Component systems?
* Is it the language aspect that is new?
* Why are IDEs and language workbenches relevant?
* If this is a modularity vision paper, what is the vision?

It is not clear whether this is a survey paper or a research paper.

It is not really a survey, since it does not refer to the existing
literature. As an example, it might be useful to have a look at
http://researchr.org/publication/BravenboerV07 , which by the way
surveys the syntactic part of language modularization. Is there a new
insight that the paper gives relative to the existing literature?

It is also not really a research paper, since it mostly discusses
generalities, without becoming detailed enough. As a research paper
there is not a clear technical contribution.

> below are some thoughts on the paper. What do you think?
> Is this enough of a contribution?
>
> Contribution:
>  - Justify the need for modular languages

I don't see that it does that. And other papers have done that. (where
are the references?)

>  - Provide a classification of modularization approaches

That seems to be the core of the paper, but it does not become clear
why that is useful.

>  - ... and a couple of examples.

The examples are very superficial. Without more of a description they
are not useful. The examples are mentioned as if the reader should be
intimately familiar with them. In the dimensions paper there was a bit
more a description that could be used as a basis.

...

I've been thinking a bit about our research collaboration. I'm finding
it quite difficult to deal with these 'survey type' papers. They tend
to be too generalistic to my taste. It would be nice to do something
more technical and down to earth. It is clear you're not going to
touch Spoofax. So perhaps we should make MPS the topic of your thesis
(that's where your passion is anyway), and that we should think about
technical papers about 'DSL engineering with MPS'. As a side effect, I
would learn something useful.

Following this line of thought, I think I would be interested in
looking into MPS when you're visiting Delft in September, and thinking
about research questions in that area.

...

Another general thought: when thinking about papers, consider not
ideas that you want to impose on others, but think about topics that
_you_ are trying to understand yourself. Your writing very much has
the flavor of advocacy rather than research. Advocacy is what you do
as a consultant. (And that is fine.) In research it is fine not to
know something. Indeed, it is the things that we don't know that are
interesting. (And I know that the distinction is not always so clear;
as researchers we're also trying to sell ideas)

...

Are you in Munich yet? How is SPLC? Good luck with the talk tomorrow.
(Any slides I should have a look at?)

cheers,


-- Eelco

P.S. Until next Tuesday (30 August) I'm working on my proposal full time.